VLMs blog (#1982)
huggingface/blog: vlms-explained.md

Author: No reason really

Reviewer: We are fans of short filenames around here :)

---

> title: "Vision Language Models Explained" 

Reviewer: We need the metadata entries in `_blog.yml`

thumbnail: /blog/assets/vlms_explained/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: merve
- user: edbeeching
---

# Vision Language Models Explained

> Vision language models are models that can learn about both images and texts to tackle various tasks. These models can solve many problems from visual question answering to image captioning. In this blog post, we go through the main building blocks ofvision language models: have an overview, grasp how they work, figure out how to find the right model, and use them. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Vision language models are models that can learn about both images and texts to tackle various tasks. These models can solve many problems from visual question answering to image captioning. In this blog post, we go through the main building blocks of vision language models: have an overview, grasp how they work, figure out how to find the right model, and use them. 
```

> Vision language models are models that can learn about both images and texts to tackle various tasks. These models can solve many problems from visual question answering to image captioning. In this blog post, we go through the main building blocks of vision language models: have an overview, grasp how they work, figure out how to find the right model, and use them. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vision language models are models that can learn simultaneously from images and texts to tackle many tasks, from visual question answering to image captioning. In this post, we go through the main building blocks of vision language models: have an overview, grasp how they work, figure out how to find the right model, how to use them for inference and how to easily fine-tune them with the new version of [trl](https://github.com/huggingface/trl) released today!
```

| [CogVLM-Chat](https://huggingface.co/THUDM/cogvlm-chat-hf)            | ✅                  | 17B        | 490x490          | Grounding, chat                       |
| [Fuyu-8B](https://huggingface.co/adept/fuyu-8b)                | ❌                  | 8B         | 300x300          | Text detection within image           |
| [KOSMOS-2](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/kosmos-2-patch14-224)               | ✅                  | ~2B        | 224x224          | Grounding, zero-shot object detection |
| [Qwen-VL](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen-VL)                | ✅                  | 4B         | 448x448          | Zero-shot object detection            |
| [Qwen-VL-Chat](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen-VL-Chat)           | ✅                  | 4B         | 448x448          | Chat                                  |
| [Yi-VL-34B](https://huggingface.co/01-ai/Yi-VL-34B)              | ✅                  | 34B        | 448x448          | Bilinguality                          |

## Finding the right vision language model

> [Vision Arena](https://huggingface.co/spaces/WildVision/vision-arena) is a leaderboard solely based on anonymous voting of model outputs, updated continuously. In this arena, the users enter an image and a prompt, and outputs from two different models are sampled anonymously, where user can pick their preferred output. This way, the leaderboard is constructed solely based on human preferences. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Vision Arena](https://huggingface.co/spaces/WildVision/vision-arena) is a leaderboard solely based on anonymous voting of model outputs and is updated continuously. In this arena, the users enter an image and a prompt, and outputs from two different models are sampled anonymously, then the user can pick their preferred output. This way, the leaderboard is constructed solely based on human preferences. 
```

<p align="center">
 <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/vlm/arena.png" alt="VLM Capabilities" style="width: 90%; height: auto;"><be>
<em>Vision Arena</em>
</p>

> [Open VLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/opencompass/open_vlm_leaderboard), is another leaderboard where various vision language models are ranked according to these metrics and average score. You can also filter models according to model sizes, proprietary or open-source licenses, and filter, and rank for different metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Open VLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/opencompass/open_vlm_leaderboard), is another leaderboard where various vision language models are ranked according to these metrics and average scores. You can also filter models according to model sizes, proprietary or open-source licenses, and filter, and rank for different metrics.
```

<p align="center">
 <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/vlm/leaderboard.png" alt="VLM Capabilities" style="width: 90%; height: auto;"><be>
<em>Open VLM Leaderboard</em>
</p>
	 

> [VLMEvalKit](https://github.com/open-compass/VLMEvalKit) is the toolkit to run benchmarks on a vision language model powering the Open VLM Leaderboard. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[VLMEvalKit](https://github.com/open-compass/VLMEvalKit) is a toolkit to run benchmarks on a vision language model that powers the Open VLM Leaderboard. 
```

Another evaluation suite is [LMMS-Eval](https://github.com/EvolvingLMMs-Lab/lmms-eval) which provides a standard command line interface to evaluate Hugging Face models of your choice with datasets hosted on Hugging Face Hub like below:

```bash
accelerate launch --num_processes=8 -m lmms_eval --model llava   --model_args pretrained="liuhaotian/llava-v1.5-7b"   --tasks mme,mmbench_en --batch_size 1 --log_samples --log_samples_suffix llava_v1.5_mme_mmbenchen --output_path ./logs/ 
```
These leaderboards are limited to the models that are submitted to them and require updates. If you want to find more models, you can browse Hugging Face Hub for [models](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=image-text-to-text&sort=trending) under task `image-text-to-text`. 

> There are different benchmarks to evaluate vision language models that you may come across the leaderboards. We will go through a few of them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are different benchmarks to evaluate vision language models that you may come across in the leaderboards. We will go through a few of them.
```

### MMMU

[A Massive Multi-discipline Multimodal Understanding and Reasoning Benchmark for Expert AGI (MMMU)](https://huggingface.co/datasets/MMMU/MMMU) is the most comprehensive benchmark to evaluate vision language models. It contains 11.5K multimodal challenges that require college-level subject knowledge and reasoning across different disciplines such as arts and engineering. 

### MMBench

> [MMBench](https://huggingface.co/datasets/lmms-lab/MMBench) is an evaluation benchmark that consists of 3000 single-choice questions over 20 different skills, including OCR, object localization and more.  The paper also introduces an evaluation strategy called CircularEval, where the answer choices of a question are shuffled in different combinations, and the model is expected to give the right answer in every turn. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[MMBench](https://huggingface.co/datasets/lmms-lab/MMBench) is an evaluation benchmark that consists of 3000 single-choice questions over 20 different skills, including OCR, object localization and more.  The paper also introduces an evaluation strategy called CircularEval, where the answer choices of a question are shuffled in different combinations, and the model is expected to give the right answer at every turn. 
```

There are other more specific benchmarks across different domains, including MathVista (visual mathematical reasoning), AI2D (diagram understanding), ScienceQA (Science Question Answering) and OCRBench (document understanding).

## Technical details 

> There are various ways to pretrain a vision language model. The main trick is to unify the image and text representation and feed it to a text decoder for generation. The most common and prominent models often consist of an image encoder, an embedding projector to align image and text representations (often a dense neural network) and a text decoder stacked in this order. As for the training parts, different models have been following different approaches. For example, LLaVA consists of a CLIP image encoder, a multimodal projector and a Vicuna text decoder. The authors fed a dataset of images and captions to GPT-4 and generated questions related to caption and the image. The authors have frozen the image encoder and text decoder and have only trained the multimodal projector to align the image and text features by feeding the model images and generated questions and comparing the model output to the ground truth captions. After the projector pretraining, they keep the image encoder frozen, unfreeze text decoder and train the projector with the decoder. This way of pre-training and fine-tuning is the most common way of training vision language models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are various ways to pretrain a vision language model. The main trick is to unify the image and text representation and feed it to a text decoder for generation. The most common and prominent models often consist of an image encoder, an embedding projector to align image and text representations (often a dense neural network) and a text decoder stacked in this order. As for the training parts, different models have been following different approaches. For example, LLaVA consists of a CLIP image encoder, a multimodal projector and a Vicuna text decoder. The authors fed a dataset of images and captions to GPT-4 and generated questions related to the caption and the image. The authors have frozen the image encoder and text decoder and have only trained the multimodal projector to align the image and text features by feeding the model images and generated questions and comparing the model output to the ground truth captions. After the projector pretraining, they keep the image encoder frozen, unfreeze the text decoder, and train the projector with the decoder. This way of pre-training and fine-tuning is the most common way of training vision language models.
```

<p align="center">
 <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/vlm/vlm-structure.png" alt="VLM Structure" style="width: 90%; height: auto;"><br>
 <em>Structure of a Typical Vision Language Model</em>
</p>
<p align="center">
 <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/vlm/proj.jpg" alt="VLM Structure" style="width: 90%; height: auto;"><br>
 <em>Projection tokens are concatenated to text tokens</em>
</p>

> Another example is KOSMOS-2, where the authors have chosen to fully train the model end-to-end, which is computationally expensive compared to LLaVA-like pre-training. The authors later do language only instruction fine-tuning to align the model. Fuyu-8B is another model that doesn’t have an image encoder, but image patches are directly fed to a projection layer and then a decoder. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another example is KOSMOS-2, where the authors chose to fully train the model end-to-end, which is computationally expensive compared to LLaVA-like pre-training. The authors later did language-only instruction fine-tuning to align the model. Fuyu-8B, as another example, doesn’t even have an image encoder. Instead, image patches are directly fed to a projection layer and then the sequence goes through an auto-regressive decoder. 
```

> Most of the time, you don’t need to pre-train a vision language model, as you can either use one of the existing ones or fine-tune them on your own use case. We will go through how to use these model using transformers and fine-tune using `SFTTrainer`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of the time, you don’t need to pre-train a vision language model, as you can either use one of the existing ones or fine-tune them on your own use case. We will go through how to use these models using transformers and fine-tune using `SFTTrainer`.
```

> Most of the time, you don’t need to pre-train a vision language model, as you can either use one of the existing ones or fine-tune them on your own use case. We will go through how to use these model using transformers and fine-tune using `SFTTrainer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the time, you don’t need to pre-train a vision language model, as you can either use one of the existing ones or fine-tune them on your own use case. We will go through how to use these models with transformers and how to fine-tune them using `SFTTrainer`.
```

> ## Using vision language models with transformers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using vision language models with transformers

```

> You can infer with vision language models without the pipeline in `LlavaNext` example below. Note that every model has its own prompt template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can infer with Llava using the `LlavaNext` model as shown below.
```

Moving the temlate part to the next step so it's closer.

> Let’s initialize the model and the processor first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s initialize the model and the processor first.

```

```python
from transformers import LlavaNextProcessor, LlavaNextForConditionalGeneration
import torch

device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
processor = LlavaNextProcessor.from_pretrained("llava-hf/llava-v1.6-mistral-7b-hf")

> model = LlavaNextForConditionalGeneration.from_pretrained("llava-hf/llava-v1.6-mistral-7b-hf", torch_dtype=torch.float16, low_cpu_mem_usage=True) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
model = LlavaNextForConditionalGeneration.from_pretrained(
    "llava-hf/llava-v1.6-mistral-7b-hf",
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
    low_cpu_mem_usage=True
)
```

I used several lines for better readability, as the page is not very wide.

model.to(device)
```

> Pass the image and the text prompt to the processor and then pass the processed inputs to call generate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

We now pass the image and the text prompt to the processor, and then pass the processed inputs to the `generate`. Note that each model uses its own prompt template, be careful to use the right one to avoid performance degradation.
```

```python
from PIL import Image
import requests

url = "https://github.com/haotian-liu/LLaVA/blob/1a91fc274d7c35a9b50b3cb29c4247ae5837ce39/images/llava_v1_5_radar.jpg?raw=true"
image = Image.open(requests.get(url, stream=True).raw)
prompt = "[INST] <image>\nWhat is shown in this image? [/INST]"

inputs = processor(prompt, image, return_tensors="pt").to(device)
output = model.generate(**inputs, max_new_tokens=100)
```

> Call decode to decode the output tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Call decode to decode the output tokens.

```

```python
print(processor.decode(output[0], skip_special_tokens=True))
```

## Fine-tuning vision language models with TRL

> We are excited to announce that TRL’s `SFTTrainer` now includes experimental support for Vision Language Models. We provide an example here of how to perform SFT on a [Llava 1.5 VLM](https://huggingface.co/llava-hf/llava-1.5-7b-hf) using the [llava-instruct](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceH4/llava-instruct-mix-vsft) dataset which contains 260k image-conversation pairs.

Reviewer: Maybe we should mention the release in the intro too for greater excitement :)

Author: I saw this was suggested and I committed

> We are excited to announce that TRL’s `SFTTrainer` now includes experimental support for Vision Language Models. We provide an example here of how to perform SFT on a [Llava 1.5 VLM](https://huggingface.co/llava-hf/llava-1.5-7b-hf) using the [llava-instruct](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceH4/llava-instruct-mix-vsft) dataset which contains 260k image-conversation pairs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are excited to announce that [TRL](https://github.com/huggingface/trl)’s `SFTTrainer` now includes experimental support for Vision Language Models! We provide an example here of how to perform SFT on a [Llava 1.5 VLM](https://huggingface.co/llava-hf/llava-1.5-7b-hf) using the [llava-instruct](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceH4/llava-instruct-mix-vsft) dataset which contains 260k image-conversation pairs.
```

The dataset contains user-assistant interactions formatted as a sequence of messages. For example, each conversation is paired with an image that the user asks questions about.

To use the experimental VLM training support, you must install the latest version of TRL, with `pip install -U trl`.
The full example script can be found [here](https://github.com/huggingface/trl/blob/main/examples/scripts/vsft_llava.py).

```python
from trl.commands.cli_utils import SftScriptArguments, TrlParser

parser = TrlParser((SftScriptArguments, TrainingArguments))
args, training_args = parser.parse_args_and_config()
```

Initialize the chat template for instruction fine-tuning.

```bash
LLAVA_CHAT_TEMPLATE = """A chat between a curious user and an artificial intelligence assistant. The assistant gives helpful, detailed, and polite answers to the user's questions. {% for message in messages %}{% if message['role'] == 'user' %}USER: {% else %}ASSISTANT: {% endif %}{% for item in message['content'] %}{% if item['type'] == 'text' %}{{ item['text'] }}{% elif item['type'] == 'image' %}<image>{% endif %}{% endfor %}{% if message['role'] == 'user' %} {% else %}{{eos_token}}{% endif %}{% endfor %}"""
```

> We will now initialize our model and tokenizer. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# We will now initialize our model and tokenizer. 
```

```python
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoProcessor, TrainingArguments, LlavaForConditionalGeneration
import torch

model_id = "llava-hf/llava-1.5-7b-hf"
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_id)
tokenizer.chat_template = LLAVA_CHAT_TEMPLATE
processor = AutoProcessor.from_pretrained(model_id)
processor.tokenizer = tokenizer

model = LlavaForConditionalGeneration.from_pretrained(model_id, torch_dtype=torch.float16)

> ````

Reviewer 3: this should be 3 ` not 4, I can't seem to suggest the change though

> Let’s create a data collator to encode text and image pairs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s create a data collator to combine text and image pairs.
```

```python
class LLavaDataCollator:
    def __init__(self, processor):
        self.processor = processor

    def __call__(self, examples):
        texts = []
        images = []
        for example in examples:
            messages = example["messages"]
            text = self.processor.tokenizer.apply_chat_template(
                messages, tokenize=False, add_generation_prompt=False
            )
            texts.append(text)
            images.append(example["images"][0])

        batch = self.processor(texts, images, return_tensors="pt", padding=True)

        labels = batch["input_ids"].clone()
        if self.processor.tokenizer.pad_token_id is not None:
            labels[labels == self.processor.tokenizer.pad_token_id] = -100
        batch["labels"] = labels

        return batch

data_collator = LLavaDataCollator(processor)
```

Load our dataset.

```python

> from datasets import load_dataset
>     raw_datasets = load_dataset("HuggingFaceH4/llava-instruct-mix-vsft")
>     train_dataset = raw_datasets["train"]
>     eval_dataset = raw_datasets["test"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from datasets import load_dataset

raw_datasets = load_dataset("HuggingFaceH4/llava-instruct-mix-vsft")
train_dataset = raw_datasets["train"]
eval_dataset = raw_datasets["test"]
```

```

> Initialize the SFTTrainer, passing in the model, the dataset splits, PEFT configuration and data collator and call `train()`. To push our final checkpoints to Hub, call `push_to_hub()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initialize the SFTTrainer, passing in the model, the dataset splits, PEFT configuration and data collator and call `train()`. To push our final checkpoint to the Hub, call `push_to_hub()`.
```

```python

> from trl import SFTTrainer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from trl import SFTTrainer

```

trainer = SFTTrainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=train_dataset,
    eval_dataset=eval_dataset,
    dataset_text_field="text",  # need a dummy field
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
    data_collator=data_collator,
    dataset_kwargs={"skip_prepare_dataset": True},
)

trainer.train()
```

Save the model and push to the Hugging Face Hub.

```python
trainer.save_model(training_args.output_dir)
trainer.push_to_hub()
```
You can find the trained model [here](https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceH4/vsft-llava-1.5-7b-hf-trl).

> You can also try the model directly in our VLM playground below ⬇️

Author: I think people can try the cached examples directly, it would be the same thing again and again if I posted a screenshot IMO

parser = TrlParser((SftScriptArguments, TrainingArguments))
args, training_args = parser.parse_args_and_config()
```

Initialize the chat template for instruction fine-tuning.

```bash
LLAVA_CHAT_TEMPLATE = """A chat between a curious user and an artificial intelligence assistant. The assistant gives helpful, detailed, and polite answers to the user's questions. {% for message in messages %}{% if message['role'] == 'user' %}USER: {% else %}ASSISTANT: {% endif %}{% for item in message['content'] %}{% if item['type'] == 'text' %}{{ item['text'] }}{% elif item['type'] == 'image' %}<image>{% endif %}{% endfor %}{% if message['role'] == 'user' %} {% else %}{{eos_token}}{% endif %}{% endfor %}"""
```

We will now initialize our model and tokenizer. 

```python
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoProcessor, TrainingArguments, LlavaForConditionalGeneration
import torch

model_id = "llava-hf/llava-1.5-7b-hf"
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_id)
tokenizer.chat_template = LLAVA_CHAT_TEMPLATE
processor = AutoProcessor.from_pretrained(model_id)
processor.tokenizer = tokenizer

model = LlavaForConditionalGeneration.from_pretrained(model_id, torch_dtype=torch.float16)

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
```

parser = TrlParser((SftScriptArguments, TrainingArguments))
args, training_args = parser.parse_args_and_config()
```

Initialize the chat template for instruction fine-tuning.

```bash
LLAVA_CHAT_TEMPLATE = """A chat between a curious user and an artificial intelligence assistant. The assistant gives helpful, detailed, and polite answers to the user's questions. {% for message in messages %}{% if message['role'] == 'user' %}USER: {% else %}ASSISTANT: {% endif %}{% for item in message['content'] %}{% if item['type'] == 'text' %}{{ item['text'] }}{% elif item['type'] == 'image' %}<image>{% endif %}{% endfor %}{% if message['role'] == 'user' %} {% else %}{{eos_token}}{% endif %}{% endfor %}"""
```

We will now initialize our model and tokenizer. 

```python
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoProcessor, TrainingArguments, LlavaForConditionalGeneration
import torch

model_id = "llava-hf/llava-1.5-7b-hf"
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_id)
tokenizer.chat_template = LLAVA_CHAT_TEMPLATE
processor = AutoProcessor.from_pretrained(model_id)
processor.tokenizer = tokenizer

model = LlavaForConditionalGeneration.from_pretrained(model_id, torch_dtype=torch.float16)

> ````

Author: ```suggestion
```
```

---
title: "Vision Language Models Explained" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/vlms_explained/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: merve
- user: edbeeching
---

# Vision Language Models Explained

> Vision language models are models that can learn simultaneously from images and texts to tackle many tasks, from visual question answering to image captioning. In this post, we go through the main building blocks of vision language models: have an overview, grasp how they work, figure out how to find the right model, how to use them for inference and how to easily fine-tune them with the new version of [trl](https://github.com/huggingface/trl) released today!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Vision language models are models that can learn simultaneously from images and texts to tackle many tasks, from visual question answering to image captioning. In this post, we go through the main building blocks of vision language models: have an overview, grasp how they work, figure out how to find the right model, how to use them for inference, and how to easily fine-tune them with the new version of [trl](https://github.com/huggingface/trl) released today!
```

> ## What is a vision language model?

Reviewer 4: Let's consistently capitalize Vision Language Model when in headings
